[Music]
so Joe A lot of times when when we're
diagnosing something that's going on in
a team or we're seeing the Dynamics
happening in a group within a course
there will be some primary Dynamic where
there's some kind of conflict or maybe
there's some Trigger or some kind of
argument or projections going around and
there will often be an underlying
secondary Dynamic and often what seems
to be going on there we've come to call
it the shame hot potato and we haven't
talked that we haven't talked about that
yet on the podcast directly so I'd love
to do this episode on the shame Hot
Potato I would love that yeah and let's
give credit to where credits do I think
that it's Tara who came up with that
phrase I think Tara was the one who came
up with SH the shame Hot Potato yeah I
would love that I think that's so good
because it's not just it's not just
group dynamics where this like happens
it's also in a lot of marriages just um
I was just talking to two folks folks in
our community who are not yet married
and got pregnant and like the whole
thing was about the shame Hot Potato
like how they triggering each other's
shame and how that just keeps this
conflict going and going and going and
going and going and going and going yeah
great so so let's define it what what
would you define as the shame Hot Potato
what is this what are the outlines of
this Dynamic yeah
somebody wants to make somebody else
ashamed or is defending themselves in
such a way that puts shame on somebody
or the person just feels ashamed and
hears whatever the other person is
saying as shame right so whatever but
they feel shame they don't want to feel
it so they try to hand it to the other
person right which is something we do
generally with a lot of emotions you
know somebody gets anxious and then they
like try to hand off their anxiety to
people or someone gets angry and they
try to like get they get angry at a lot
of people this would be like people
trying to get like take their shame and
make other people feel it got it you
know okay you know like you hear it all
the time like especially nowadays in the
news you'll hear a lot of people saying
they should be ashamed and that would be
like the most explicit version of of it
most of the time it's far more implicit
than that but that's what we're talking
about and so the hot potatoes one person
tries to give it to the other and then
the other person tries to give it back
and they just go back and forth trying
to and S usually successfully inflicting
shame on one another got it of course
doesn't solve [__] right right and so
this this would be something underlying
a lot of Dynamics where rather than
looking for the solution people are
trying to figure out who's to blame or
who got it wrong that might be one
pointer to this being an
underlying Factor yeah um that that's
right right yeah so the indicators are
blame that's being passed along for sure
is a a big one if people are focused on
what the other person is did or is
doing um instead of how they're creating
their own reality instead of being in
understanding their own golden algorithm
of how that how they're creating the
situation that's another big one just if
you're in the same conflict with
somebody for an extended period of time
like if your marriage has the same kind
of fight or if your um if your company
has the same kind of problem over and
over again or if you're a country with
the same problem over and over again
like political system you're pretty much
sure that you're in a shame Hot Potato
because just as shame in our shame
episode we talk about how it stagnates
emotions it stagnates fights and
countries and politics and marriages as
well so when you see that stagnation you
know like shame guilt that kind of thing
is
involved Shame Shame slows down the
process as much in groups as it does in
an individual it's kind of what you're
saying there correct that's right that's
yeah exactly and so that's another
indicator that it's
happening yeah okay so what are what are
some specific examples of how this might
show up in a
company for examp like a really easy one
for a company is you know I was working
with a venture capital
coming every time there was a mistake
there was like so much energy put
towards who is responsible for the
mistake and like partially this person
partially that person you know
everybody's just like looking instead of
oh how do we make sure we don't make
that mistake again instead of what can
we learn here instead of how do we fix
it it was who's to blame you know and
that was like the way that they
processed mistakes that would be a great
example of a shame Hot Potato um another
another one that you see a lot is if you
see like um you know typically like
maybe it's uh marketing has a conflict
with the technology side of the business
or product has a has a problem with the
sales side of the business right there
there's that conflict if you see that
conflict happening over and over again
typically what it is is everybody's
focused on what they don't have what the
other part of the team isn't giving them
instead of being focused on their own
resourcefulness and so that's also a
really good indicator that there's a
shame Hot Potato happening where
everyone's trying to trying to defend oh
I'm not wrong I'm not bad but yet
feeling wrong and bad and I think that's
a really critical point is that if you
need to
uh convince somebody that you're not
wrong or you're not bad it means you
feel like you're wrong and bad means
you're in the
shame like if somebody said to me uh you
know you're a horrible [__] father
that would not create shame in me
there's nothing in me that feels like Oh
I'm a horrible [__] father right so
there wouldn't that wouldn't create
shame in me but if somebody said
something that actually would trigger me
then something that I actually believed
about myself then I would there would be
this need to defend myself typically so
the important thing there is that if you
actually
believe the thing then you'll think you
need to defend it if you don't believe
it you won't need to defend it so you
have to buy into the shame to be to
start really defending yourself so if
someone said to you you are a horrible
salesperson and you believed it you'd be
like no I'm not let me explain blah blah
blah blah blah if there's some part of
you that believed it but if there was no
part of you that believed it you
wouldn't need to do that you wouldn't
like immediately get defensive you might
explain yourself but you wouldn't do it
in any kind of defensive way and so
that's part of what how the shame Hot
Potato goes back and
forth Yeah couple pieces there I mean
one what you said about like believing
it there could also be like whether or
not it actually bothers you like I could
believe I'm a horrible violin player and
if at my first violin lesson I'll be
like yeah great I'm a horrible violin
player I'm not going to defend that yeah
very well said yes that's right yeah and
another piece here is that and it has to
bother you yeah great yeah and and
another piece here is that you can use
defensiveness as a as a breadcrumb back
to this pattern wherever you see
defensiveness in yourself or in another
in a team in a in a dynamic that that's
where you can look for where the shame
Hot Potato might be getting passed
around that's right that's exactly it
yeah okay so You' mentioned in uh
countries also earlier that this is a
dynamic how does this show up how do you
see this showing up in politics oh my
God I mean like look at any kind of
political mess in the world whether you
know it's American politics or politics
in the Middle East if you look at it
it's a whole bunch of people feeling
like somebody else is wrong and bad and
and it also indicates that they feel
like they're wrong and bad like there's
no way
you can look at any two sides of of like
politics or war and not see that like
there is some way in which both sides
are being defensive both sides are
ashamed both sides are not
acting you know in full alignment with
who they are there there everybody is
making some sort of compromises and it
feels like [__] and so they're just
passing the shame Hot Potato back and
forth so so what are what are the
mechanisms by which the shame hot hot
potato gets passed
around yeah so
um externally it's anger and uh removal
of love so it's aggression or passive
aggression is the other way to say it
so um and and and so so anytime that you
see that happening let's let's take a
marriage as an example perfect example
in a marriage right so one person
typically gets more angry one person
typically removes Love sometimes both do
it this is like the way to feel ashamed
and the the the interesting part of this
is that in on a nervous system level
like the often the only thing you have
to do to make somebody feel like they're
bad is get angry at them it's not
actually what you said it's just like oh
if I get angry at you a lot of people
immediately go Oh what did I do wrong or
if you remove love they immediately go o
what did I do wrong on a nervous system
level and so so that behavior going back
and forth is just what passes the shame
back and forth so if you see that
happening if you see the defensiveness
and the blame happening the anger the
passive aggressive then that's the
that's the emotional and nervous system
mechanism for passing it back and forth
the intellectual mechanism of passing it
back and forth is very much about
like who trying to figure out who the
[__] is wrong like trying to figure out
who did it wrong and like you like
almost all of YouTube's political diet
tribes are people you know like making a
case that the other side is wrong like I
like how often do you see a political
diet tribe saying oh here's how we might
be able to correct ourselves here's it
like it's just like this constant
defense and so I remember this time in
the marriage with Tara And I marriage
where I had to come to the conclusion
she's always
right that from her point of view she is
right her truth is right it is something
that I should seek to understand should
is a strong word but if I seek to
understand how what she's saying is true
for her it is a completely different
discussion than if I am trying to show
her how she's mistaken
right yeah the lad does not work very
well it does not work people seem to
repeat it though and a per particularly
repeat it because it's effective at
passing on the shame okay so I have
proven to you that you're wrong the
other person feels ashamed and it's like
somehow there's this
like surrogate of relief there's like
this kind of relief it's like a the kind
of relief that like a video game gives
you it's like oh you can you can be out
of it but it never never really actually
heals the pattern and so there's a lot
of you know in a lot of relationships
it's like whoever can argue better is
the right one instead of oh let me fully
understand what makes you think you're
right you can fully understand what
makes me think I'm right and together we
can both learn how to grow and become
better people from it that's when you're
not passing the shame hot potato and so
so that's the intellectual side is is
like the defensiveness trying to justify
your behavior argue for it Etc yeah both
both sides seeing the other can only
happen if both sides are in agreement
that there's not a that none of them are
wrong that there's just more awareness
that can be brought to the situation or
that it's not bad to be incorrect or
that they need to be right yeah it
doesn't require both sides it in a
marriage you don't I wouldn't suggest
being married to somebody who who can't
get there like I think the the whole
thing about marriage is you know wanting
to grow and learn together but the but
like in a political conversation or a
business conversation if the shame Hot
Potato is going back and forth it only
requires one person to stop it you just
drop the hot potato drop the Hot Potato
yeah like feel the shame process the
emotions that are underneath it and
listen to the person and see what's true
for them and what's going on and and ask
view questions and and be impartial like
that can that can solve a hot potato
inside of an organization or a marriage
all the
time so why doesn't this happen more
often what makes what makes the what
makes the the game of hot potato
continue part of it is just a lack of
awareness right I think people like when
I was working with this couple this
weekend one of the things that I noticed
is they they just weren't
aware that and and and they even
intellectually saying it I would say it
to them and they weren't aware of it and
it wasn't
until I got to a point where I was
having them do this experiment which is
just look at one another and U say
there's nothing in me that wants you to
feel ashamed or bad right
now and that was the confrontation
needed for them to actually really see
it to really feel it the first was like
wait I I don't feel comfortable saying
that so oh so you do want them to feel
ashamed what's that getting you right
there is that aspect of it and then the
second aspect which I think is for them
to be able to say it in a way that felt
good is they realized that they had to
give themselves that
same that same Grace that same
gentleness and so so often times the
thing that's stopping people is that is
their feeling their own feeling of sh
shame if I'm going to feel shame then
you should feel shame that's the
subconscious thought process there so
the first one is to really get in touch
with oh do I really want this person to
feel
ashamed and emotionally you know there
might be like yeah I do when you really
sit with it you realize anytime someone
feels ashamed they just like repeat the
pattern so it's a horrible thing to want
people to feel
um to feel all the pain and grief
underneath that that's amazing um but
then you also have to get in touch with
the fact that you're feeling that shame
and you're and it's very hard to give
somebody else the gentl gentleness and
Grace that you're not giving yourself
yeah yeah on the intellectual side it's
easy to be like oh yeah I I don't need
to want myself to be in shame right but
on a subconscious level when we've been
patterned in conditioned to believe that
shame will actually make us safe and
protect us from attack right how do you
how do you stop that how do you how do
you stop this process when that's the
subconscious process that's going every
time you're not just literally
consciously remembering this at the
moment yeah it's just feel what's
underneath the shame it's always feel
what's underneath the shame the shame is
so the shame is it's not just the shame
if I feel shame I'll be protected from
future attack it's the shame right now
is protecting me from an emotion I don't
want to feel whether that's attack or
whether that's grief or whether that's
anger but it's protecting you from an
emotion in this moment and so if you
feel what's underneath then you have
movement again then you have the lack of
stagnation again and so that's the crit
that's the real critical piece is to on
the emotional level is to really to feel
it the and on the intellectual level
it's really a deconstruction
of of the right and wrong piece like
there's there's there's this thing and
it happened with a couple and it's
happened in many companies I've worked
in too where
they're it's like it's it's a little bit
beyond right and wrong good and bad it's
it's like it's essentially there's
something wrong with
me and if you
can and see that right so I'll give you
a really good example if you can see
that there's not something um inherently
wrong with you and that is like a great
relief of the shame and so I'll give you
an
example
um
I or anybody gets angry at one of their
kids okay there's another parent the kid
could do the same thing so let's say the
kid spills milk one parent gets angry
one parent
doesn't the kid has an essentially done
anything wrong but they're going to feel
wrong if what if their parent gets angry
they're not going to feel wrong if their
parent doesn't get
angry right and so if you look at
anything that you've done there's
somebody on this planet that's going to
have understanding for that who's going
to have gentleness for
that so there's some World in which like
you never deserve the
punishment there's some World in which
you're not essentially wrong and so if
you can see that if you can see like oh
yeah I made a mistake but that doesn't
mean I'm bad it doesn't mean I didn't
have good intentions underneath it
doesn't mean that I'm not
trying if you can give yourself that
like level of relief I'm not
saying that you don't want to fix it I'm
not saying that you don't want to you
know take beh take action to like
understand yourself more clearly and to
not repeat patterns that are destructive
I'm not saying any of that I'm just
saying that essence of I'm bad I'm wrong
because I did this if you can see
through that intellectually through
deconstruction that offers a tremendous
amount of relief from the shame hot
potato and you see great leaders do this
all the time you know they'll say like
oh we're not going to spend any time
figuring out who's to blame we're gonna
figure out we're gonna spend time
figuring out how to make sure this
doesn't happen again is the way that a
leader would happen or another one would
be a leader in an upright saying the
whole thing is my responsibility I'm the
leader I take full responsibility now
how are we going to fix it like somebody
who can show that I can take
responsibility for this and I don't have
to be ashamed in The Taking of
responsibility I can be wrong and I
don't need to take on any kind of Shame
that's another that's the kind of leader
we really want to follow you know the
buck stops here was the famous what was
it Eisenhower or Truman I can't remember
but like it was on on the desk it's like
I'm I'm the one responsible that shows
people that shame this isn't about shame
this is just about taking
responsibility yeah and one one thing
I'm curious about here is if you if you
do the intellectual deconstruction on
the Bel the belief system of that I'm
bad or wrong but it still exists
somewhere deep somatically then my
taking responsibility for it could still
be done in a subtly shamey way that I
might not see what do I do about that
like let's say I've done something that
I on some deep moral level legitimately
believe is wrong like I've stolen
something or I've hurt somebody
intentionally and intellectually I'm
like okay yeah I'm not bad and wrong but
every fiber in my being feels wrong
about it then what do you do in that
kind of
situation yeah it's a great question so
again the most important thing is to
feel the emotion that's underneath that
so if you've done something that you
really feel is essentially
bad so a way that you don't want to be
then there's probably a tremendous
amount of grief there and probably a
tremendous amount of helplessness and if
you feel that grief and helplessness
then the behavior is far more likely to
stop than if you feel shame I know I've
said it before on the podcast but shame
is the lock that holds the chains of bad
habits in place and so if you get into a
shame cycle it's a stagnation and you're
more likely to repeat
that
behavior um so but feel the emotions
that are underneath and that's going to
make a significant
difference
also you know if you think about it as
um a kid if you tell a kid they're
naughty all the time they're gonna start
behaving naughty if you tell a kid
they're dumb all the time they're going
to behave
dumb same if you do it to yourself if
you label yourself that way so whether
it's true or not true is somewhat
irrelevant what's relevant is what's
effective like what's the effective way
to like we all know that companies that
are constantly blaming one another are
less effective than companies where
everybody takes
responsibility same thing with us like
it's the same thing if we're constantly
blaming ourselves we are less effective
than if we take responsibility in a non-
shameful way not responsibil like I'm
bad see you know so it is very much an
upright very empowered I mean that's the
other thing about it is when somebody
says the buck stops here or when
somebody says no I'm not going to defend
myself around that that like I won't I
won't be
defensive
um
then then it's a deeply empowering act
it's scary to do at the moment because
you're like oh my God I'm G to give
someone's going to take advantage of me
but when you do it you realize oh like
nobody if you don't defend yourself
nobody can attack you it's like like the
I think it's a Zen who have the thing of
like if you're being attacked by a sword
be the
ocean like there's no defense in the
ocean like they can whack away at it
they'll just Tire themselves out and
it's actually as you know I've been on
Twitter for the last couple months
actually me on Twitter um instead of
just having some like dormant account
and it's one of my favorite Parts about
Twitter is that occasionally I get crazy
attacked and I'm like oh wow and it like
I'm like oh how how do I be undefended
here how do I like and often times I
just I can like laugh you there was some
guy named like lurker MC lurk face or
something like that who was like
trolling me and I was like oh wow I get
and then I could just like laugh and so
it's just like there's something there's
something really sweet about that for me
in social media it's like this Perpetual
exercise about how to be non-fed in my
Approach with people a big part of the
the journey here is getting down to the
Nuance of when I'm feeling what's
underneath the shame how do I notice if
there's still a little bit of shame in
it because somebody could receive
whatever attack on Twitter or X and they
can laugh and the laugh could be
defensive the laugh could be like over
the toop like power over the other
person the laugh could be just like
laughing at the way that I was wrong
maybe or yeah like arrogant or something
that's great if you don't feel empowered
and invigorated then you're still in it
you're still in the shame yeah so that's
another piece here is like if I'm
feeling the feeling perhaps the grief
that's underneath the shame yeah
somewhere in there if I'm not also
feeling empowerment if the process
doesn't lead you to empowerment yeah if
the process doesn't lead to empowerment
so there could also be a fear of feeling
empowerment too if I feel empowerment I
should instead feel shame to block that
because that might have been something I
was conditioned in my past feel or
display happens a lot yeah yeah good
good catch yeah the the at the end of
the day
the you can you don't have to worry
about it too much because you can just
act on the shame that you can sense and
the more you act on that the more you
sense the shame shame is an incredibly
stagnating and shitty feeling but act on
you mean not acting it out I mean like
loving the shame and inquiring and
seeing what's beneath it and yeah
exactly if you if you thank you yeah if
you if you give the attention to the
shame then you just become more and more
sensitive to it and becomes more and
more un un
unacceptable for for yourself or others
like when I see somebody else in
shame it's just like for me it's
like it's like oh no
oh no like if I'm interacting with
somebody and I see their shame I'm like
oh no like here it like this is going to
be dramatic you know what I mean and and
so I I there's nothing in me that wants
anybody to be ashamed I don't want to
stop if they feel ashamed that's their
that's their role that's what they need
to do and get through whatever they're
getting through but like the idea of
like I want you to be ashamed because
somehow I think that's going to stop
something you know like like like look
at what human beings do and you know
that they feel ashamed if they do some
of the crazy stuff that human beings do
you can't not unless you're you know
maybe one of those few sociopaths you
can't not feel ashamed doing it it's why
people who do some of the most horrific
stuff have to be high all the time or
drunk all the time
or you know on methamphetamine all the
time if you look at like what wars do to
people heroin all the time because it
just we have this feeling of shame in us
and and it just it perpetuates the whole
thing instead of feeling the grief
underneath
it like if everybody if you look at a
war if like if I took a war situation
and I could snap my fingers and
everybody could fully feel the
grief and the anger and the helplessness
of that war everybody top to bottom of
both sides of the war the war would be
done it'd be
over it's the fact that everybody can't
do that and they're in shame that
perpetuates the whole thing and that's
true with a marriage or in a company so
that I guess that's another way to look
at it is like if you're in a war with
yourself if you're in a war in your
marriage if you're in a war in the
company like that that's an indicator of
Shame
yeah yeah it's another way we've talked
about this before
where taking the conflict and bringing
it internally to
yourself rather than being in Integrity
with yourself and then showing up in a
way
that cannot
maintain the shitty Dynamic something
has to change yeah yeah that's right and
I and the other thing that's really
important my experience is I've gone
through a couple stages in my life where
the only thing I could do is be non
defended the only thing that I could do
is just every day show up and say I'm
sorry or you know like like I I accept
full responsibility I'll take on all of
the blame and shame from you I won't I
won't take it on I won't give it to
myself but I'll take all of that on and
to me that has been like the biggest
gift of my life
by far as far as an emotional process my
kids my wife obviously bigger gifts but
the but the as far as an emotional
process has been a gigantic gift for me
it's um it like it erods
away we're all narcissistic on some
level but it erods away our narcissism
so so
quickly because it it requires us to
feel if we do that we have have to
feel all the stuff and and narcissism to
a large part is just not feeling
feelings on the emotional level on the
intellectual level it's very much about
our each of our narcissism is the way
that we put ourselves above others
quietly or out and I could see that
being exactly the way this is done too
somebody could be coming from the Savior
like okay I'm going to take on
everyone's shame I'm going to process it
I'm going to be the one who's better
here and
what happened how how do you do it the
way you just describe not this other way
and just notice what you just did is you
took all the emotion out of your voice
to be able to maintain that role you I'm
gonna be the one I'm controlling my
emotional state it's the opposite of
that it is
the oh it is the it is the it is the
like feeling all the pain feeling the
helplessness it's I love the metaphor of
Jesus in this particular way because
it's like he didn't just get on the
cross in the metaphor
he why have you forsaken me he felt the
pain like it wasn't just like I'm great
this is no problem we're all going to be
in Kingdom of God today like it was it
was like he felt all of that struggle
and and and the result in that metaphor
the result
is is that like there was a death of the
personality and right like so the the
the the sense of self dies through that
process that undefended
process is like it it is like it is the
one of the quickest ways I know
to to to like burn through our false
sense of self yeah death after death
after
death until eventually
the capacity begins to emerge to allow
somebody to be wrong on the
[Laughter]
internet so good I stole that from a
tweet so God good can you repeat that
that was so good well yeah
um death after I me life is just ego
death after ego death each time are
we're wearing away our Our rough spots
and our edges until eventually the
capacity begins to emerge to allow
somebody to be wrong on the
internet
exactly or in the marriage or in
business or in politics yeah that's
it
beautiful thank you Brett yeah thank you
Joe what a wonderful podcast
thanks